Project: Fused Salt Fusion
- Hello, I'm Howard Tracy Hall, Jr, @hthalljr. I go by Tracy Jr to distinguish myself from my late father and from my son and colleague, Huntington Tracy Hall.
- in May 2022, at the age of 76, I came out of retirement to rejoin Hall Labs for this project.
- Our goal is to develop a stand-alone cold fusion reactor that drives an electric generator, continually powering itself and a 1000 watt load for a month.
- I originally named the project "Very Cold Fusion," based on a notion that cold fusion might be associated with superconductivity and that low temperature might enhance that effect. My intent was to extract fusion energy directly as microwaves in a resonant cavity operating at liquid nitrogen temperature. After 7 months of study, I failed to find sufficient justification for the idea and decided to focus instead on incremental improvements to the discoveries of others. 
- Hall Labs is an evergreen incubator founded in 1955 by H. Tracy Hall, Sr. My brother, David R. Hall, is the current CEO. Hall Labs is funding the project and is providing facilities, project management, and engineering expertise; I am donating my ideas and my time.
- Our project is motivated by humanitarian considerations, and the basic cold fusion processes will be committed to the public domain, free to all, with no secrecy and no patents. (How can you patent fire?) We publish our concepts, plans, and results on the Internet, regardless of success or failure. (I chalk up the first seven months of this project as "learning experiemces.")
- If we do succeed, many opportunities will follow for specific commercial applications with patentable improvements, and Hall Labs already has some such applications in mind. 
- GitHub is our primary open-source repository: new commits to Github are announced in that well-known scientific forum, Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/people/Tracy-Hall-Jr/578136106/
- We agree with Adam Smith that when everyone acts upon their own enlightened self interest, society as a whole will benefit. So fork this project! If your interests are humanitarian, dedicate your improvements to the public domain. If your interests are commercial and you believe your improvements are patentable, go for it! Do be aware that, at least in the USA, the patent office regards cold fusion with the same distain as perpetual motion and might insist on a working model.
- Not long after the first cold fusion announcement (Fleischmann & Pons 1989), a group at the Naval Ocean Systems Center in California improved upon their work with a codeposition experiment (Szpak & Mosier-Boss 1991). They reasoned that the long incubation time in the F-P experiment must have been due to slow diffusion in palladium, so they deposited deuterium simultaneously with palladium under conditions otherwise similar to F-P. The deuterium was instantly included in the palladium at high concentration, requiring little if any diffusion. Rather than waiting weeks to observe excess heat, Szpak and Mosier-Boss observed it promptly.
- Many experiments demonstrate that the principle nuclear ash in cold fusion is Helium 4, in quantities commensurate with the observed excess heat (Miles 2003). Since the diffusion of helium in palladium is extremely slow, these experiments indicate that the nuclear-active site must be at or near the surface .
- Some have suggested that the nuclear activity in the Fleischmann-Pons experiment might be associated with a vacancy phase in palladium that is stabilized by deuterium (Letts & Hagelstein 2012, Staker 2019). Super-abundant vacancies (SAVs) were discovered in 1993 by Yuh Fukai and Nobuyuki Ōkuma, who forced hydrogen into nickel, palladium, and other metals at 5GPa (50 kbar) and 700 to 800 C while monitoring the lattice parameters (Fukai & Ōkuma 1993). They encapsulated their sample in salt, which is an excellent pressure transmitting medium and is impervious to hydrogen. (For the same reasons, many oil and gas deposits are found under a trapping layer of salt). The concentration of vacancies in metals, even near their melting points, is usually lower than about 0.1 atomic %, but Fukai observed astonishing vacancy concentrations of up to 30%! Each vacancy was stabilized by interaction with up to 6 adjacent hydrogen atoms. Significant for our experiment, the vacancies persisted when the sample was removed from the press and reheated, at atmospheric pressure, up to about 800 C. Fukai's discovery upset the received understanding of metal-hydrogen systems by demonstrating that SAVs are, in fact, the most thermodynamically stable phase, and that most previously-known phases are actually metastable relative to them. Fukai also suggested that SAVs could be created during electroplating of metals and found hydrogen-stabilized vacancies in samples of electrolytic copper and nickel that had persisted for decades (Fukai et al. 2003).
- Interestingly, Fukai employed a cubic x-ray press and calibrated the pressure with Dan Decker's PVT equation of state for sodium chloride. My father invented the multi-anvil press (Hall 1958). Later he and Dean Barnett built a tetrahedral press for in-situ x-ray diffraction and used it to confirm Decker's scale (Jeffrey et al. 1966). That elegant machine is now on display at Hall Labs.
- Letts and Hagelstein suggest that Fleischmann and Pons had, in fact, unknowingly created conditions for formation of SAVs, and that the nuclear activity must have occurred primarily in the outer 100-300 nanometers of the palladium cathode. They provide an estimate of the H/metal ratio needed to facilitate various concentrations of SAVs, at temperatures from 0 to 1000 K. For 25% SAVs in nickel, the ratio decreases from 0.7 at 0 K to 0.53 at 1000 K. For 25% SAVs in palladium, the ratio decreases from 1.0 at 0 K to 0.8 at 1000 K. They improved upon the Szpak protocol by reducing the Pd(++) concentration about 40-fold while increasing the activity of D(+), thereby further promoting SAVs. Their experiment ran at 50 C (323 K), with a D/Pd ratio of about 0.95 and an estimated SAV concentration of 25%. 
- Our first experiment will be with nickel, because it forms SAVs at lower hydrogen concentrations than palladium and is much less expensive. We will run at about 650 C (923 K), targeting a D/Ni ratio of about 0.55 and a SAV concentration of about 25%.
- Most cold fusion experiments to date have been in aqueous systems, with temperatures below the boiling of water (100 C). Carnot's theorem states that the efficiency of any heat engine is limited to the ratio [T(hot) -T(cold)]/T(hot), where T(hot) is the input temperature and T(cold) is the output temperature, in Kelvin. Thus the efficiency of a heat engine with 100 C input (373 K) and 25 C output (298 K) is limited to (373-298)/373 or about 20%. Modern thermal power plants generate high pressure steam at about 650 C (923 K) and condense it at 25 C (298 K), for a maximum efficiency of (923-298)/923 or about 68%.
- We propose two improvements to existing protocols, the first incremental and the second revolutionary.
- **First, Run hot!**
- A group at the University of Hawaii (Liaw et al. 1991) were the first to achieve cold fusion at thermodynamically useful temperatures (370 C to 470 C; 54% to 61% Carnot cycle efficiency). They dissolved lithium deuteride (LiD) in a eutectic (minimum melting point) mixture of lithium and potassium chloride (LiCl, KCl). In their experiment, the deuterium was present in the melt as an anion, D(-) and was oxidized to atomic D at a Pd anode, where some of it entered the Pd lattice. The Li(+) cation was reduced at an aluminum cathode, where it reacted to form a series of lithium-aluminum intermetallics. (By contrast, in the Fleischmann-Pons experiment, the deuterium was in aqueous solution as a cation, D(+), and was reduced to atomic D at a Pd cathode, where some of it entered the Pd lattice, and oxygen bubbled off a platinum anode.) Liaw et al. reported considerable excess heat in some experiments but found the results difficult to replicate. As with F-P, most of the deuterium escaped as D2 gas; also, lithium was depleted by reaction with the aluminum cathode. 
- We propose to run considerably hotter, at about 650 C, (dull red heat, 68% Carnot cycle efficiency), in the same temperature range as thermal power plants. We will use lithium chloride (LiCl), which melts at 605 C. The nickel source will be solid nickel oxide (NiO), which reacts with 2 LiCl to give the dissolved ions Ni(++), O(--), 2 Li(+), and 2 Cl(-) (Horvath and Simpson 2018). In the similar process for electrolytic reduction of spent uranium oxide fuel in molten LiCl, a small percent of Li2O, of the order of 1 wt %, is added to lower the reduction potential of uranium oxide and to assure that the gas produced at the anode will be oxygen instead of chlorine (Williams et al. 2021). The solubility limit of Li20 in LiCl at 650 C is 8.7 wt % (Hur et al 2010). Our deuterium source will be D2O, introduced as vapor transported by argon. The D2O will react with 2 LiCl to form the dissolved ions 2 D(+), O(-2), 2 Li(+), and 2 Cl(-), with the latter three ions adding to those already derived from the NiO. The applied voltage will be limited so that nickel metal, atomic deuterium, and atomic oxygen are produced in preference to molten lithium and chlorine gas.
- A process for safely adding controlled amounts of H2O to molten LiCl via a stream of argon and electrolytically producing H2 and O2 gases at relatively low voltages was developed by a group at Northeastern University in Shenyang, China (Xie & Kamali 2019). Their focus was on facile reduction of metal oxide ores and production of carbon nanomaterials. Hydrogen is produced at the metal oxide cathode, which is then reduced to metal; the oxygen bubbles off at a graphite anode. (At 650 C, oxidation of graphite is minimal). In one noteworthy experiment, (Qiao et al. 2020), they reduced cobalt oxide to cobalt metal in its high temperature fcc phase, which, surprisingly, remained stable when cooled to room temperature. They believe that the stability arose from "hydrogen doping" at 0.113 wt% (see p. 2232). That is 6.2 atomic percent, which leads me to believe that they had accidentally rediscovered super-abundant vacancies! They did not mention SAVs or Fukai's work, noting only that the high hydrogen concentration merited further investigation. If they had used D2O instead of H2O, would they have also rediscovered cold fusion? In order to maintain a constant temperature, would they have needed to turn the furnace power down? We intend to find out!
- **Second, Run in circles!**
- The truly "revolutionary" aspect of our experiment is to use alternating current (AC) instead of direct current (DC)! If you want to accumulate a product, you must, of course, use DC. But cold fusion, as currently practiced with a fixed anode and cathode, only consumes materials. An extreme instance of this was reported by Mosier-Boss to Letts & Hagelstein (2012, ref. 9, p. 54). The palladium-deuterium alloy, which was being codeposited onto a thin square copper cathode, eventually grew to a sphere one inch in diameter, while all the time the nuclear activity was only at the surface. The palladium could, of course, eventually be recycled, but try to imagine the inventory of palladium that would be required for a power plant!
- Given that the nuclear activity occurs on the surface, why not just cyclically grow, disintigrate, and re-grow that surface? This can be accomplished by rapidly switching the current between two identical electrodes, A and B, which on successive half-cycles serve either as as a cathode (for simultanious reduction of Ni(++) and D(+) to a Ni-D alloy), or as an anode (oxidation back to dissolved NiO and D2O). In the first half-cycle, a thin layer of metal in a nuclear-active SAV state is laid down on electrode A, while the layer that had been deposited previously on electrode B is simultaneously disintigrated. In the second half-cycle, an active layer is laid down on electrode B while the layer on electrode A is disintigrated. The frequency will need to be increased to the point that adsorbed D is oxidized back to D(+) and adsorbed O is reduced back to O(--) before they can escape as bubbles. Measurements under conditions similar to ours indicate that H2 and O2 can be retained at the cathode and anode surfaces at frequencies above about 2 Hz (estimated from Gese 2015, pp 93-94).
- A familiar example of AC electrolysis that converts electrical energy to heat is the tap-water immersion humidifier, which generates steam at 60 Hz and 120 V AC without evolving hydrogen or oxygen. 
- A simplified net cathode reaction might be Ni(++) +2.55 D(+) + 4.55 e(-) = Ni(.55 D)(solid) + 2 D (adsorbed). In order to drive D into the developing lattice, excess D activity must be provided at the surface: the excess of 2 D at the surface is just a guess. The corresponding net anode reaction would then be Ni(.55 D) +2 D (adsorbed) = Ni(++) + 2.55 D(+) - 4.55 e(-). The deuterium activity might not, in fact, need to be very high: Qiao et al. operated at only 1 volt, just sufficient to reduce 2 H(+) to H2. In our experiment, the deuterium and nickel will be continuously regenerated, so that only a small inventory of either is required. We will probably "run in circles" at about 3 Hz while providing sufficient current density to deposit a nickel-SAV layer of about 50 to 300 nanometers. We will initially use a square wave but will also explore other waveforms.
- A technique similar to ours is known as cyclic voltammetry (CV), which has long been used to characterize electrochemical reactions. It is seldom continued beyond a few cycles, whereas we hope to run our hamster cage indefinitely. Also, we lack a reference electrode, but we could include a pseudo-reference electrode, most likely of molybdenum, to enable separate characterization of the anode and cathode during a single half-cycle.
- Calculations for the experiments are committed to this repository as a native Libre Office spreadsheet "Fused Salt Fusion.ods," also converted to Microsoft .xls format. The detailed protocol for the experiment will be named "Fused Salt Fusion protocol.pdf."
- As detailed in the spreadsheet, the reactor will comprise a cage of 6 pairs of 12 AWG pure nickel electrodes, 2.05 mm in diameter, immersed to a depth of 10 cm of molten LiCl in a closed-bottom alumina tube. The total immersed surface area is 77 sq cc. In any half-cycle, half that area will be active as a cathode; the other as an anode. Provision is made for a molybdenum wire pseudo-reference electrode. Insulated leads will be attached to the bottom of electrodes A and B to measure potentials relative to the reference electrode. Calorimetry will be facilitated by a thermocouple in the molten salt and a calibration heater in an alumina tube immersed in the salt. A four-quadrant power supply, Kepco BOP6-125 MG 4, will provide up to 125 amperes of electrolysis current with arbitrary programmable waveforms at 0 to 800 Hz. (The experiment will draw at most about 20 A; but the power supply was a great deal on EBay and might eventually suffice to drive our 1kW power plant).
- Depending on the results of the nickel experiment, we we may also try palladium, cobalt and other transition elements and alloys that are capable of forming SAVs.
- Experiments performed in July, 2023 in 0.3M NaCl solution show that at a current density of 500 mA/cm^2, evolution of H2 and O2 is suppressed at frequencies of 5Hz and higher.
- We hope to test the AC technique in August 2023 with a "quick and dirty" experiment in aqueous solution to 95 C (the boiling point of water at our altitude). We'll first Ni on Ni electrodes, then perhaps Pd on Ni electrodes, and perhaps later Pd on gold-plated copper electrodes. Two identical test-tube-sized reactors, each with two wire electrodes and a resistance heater for calorimetry, will be wired in series. Each will use 5 ml of the electrolyte recommended by Letts and Hagelstein; one with D2O; the other with H2O. If substantial excess heating is observed, this simple experiment could quickly lead to the long-sought cold fusion water heater.
- **References**
- Fleischmann, Martin and Pons, Stanley (1989) 'Electrochemically induced nuclear fusion of deuterium', J. Electroanal. Chem., 261, p. 301 and errata in Vol. 263. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0728(89)80006-3 
- Fukai, Yuh and Ōkuma, Nobuyuki (1993) 'Evidence of Copious Vacancy Formation in Ni and Pd under a High Hydrogen Pressure', Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 32, pp. L 1256-L 1259, Part 2, No. 9A. https://doi.org/10.1143/JJAP.32.L1256
- Fukai, Y; Mizutani M.; Yokota S.; Kanazawa, M.; Miura, Y.; and Watanabe, T. (2003) 'Superabundant vacancy–hydrogen clusters in electrodeposited Ni and Cu', Journal of Alloys and Compounds 356–357 pp. 270–273. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0925-8388(02)01270-7
- Gese, Natalie J. (2015) 'The Electrochemistry of Li-LiCl-Li2O Molten Salt Systems and the Role of Moisture', MS Thesis, University of Idaho, https://www.lib.uidaho.edu/digital/etd/items/gese_idaho_0089n_10453.html
- Hall, Howard T. (1958), 'High Pressure Press,' US Patent 2,918,699, filed April 28, 1958, issued Dec. 29, 1959. https://patents.google.com/patent/US2918699/en
- Horvath, D. and Simpson, M. F. (2018) 'Electrochemical Monitoring of Ni Corrosion Induced by Water inEutectic LiCl-KCl', Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 165 (5) C226-C233. https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1149/2.0391805jes
- Hur, Jin-Mok; Jeong, Sang Mun; and Lee, Hansoo (2010) 'Underpotential deposition of Li in a molten LiCl–Li2O electrolyte for the electrochemical reduction of U from uranium oxides', Electrochemistry Communications 12, pp. 706–709. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1388248110001013
- Jefferey, R. N.; Barnett, J. D.; Vanfleet, H. B.; and Hall, H. T. (1966) 'Pressure Calibration to 100 kbar Based on the Compression of NaCl', Journal of Applied Physics, 37 (8), p. 3172-3180  https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/facpub/807/
- Letts, Dennis and Hagelstein, Peter L. (2012) 'Modified Szpak Protocol for Excess Heat' J. Condensed Matter Nucl. Sci. 6, pp. 44–54 https://jcmns.scholasticahq.com/article/72159-modified-szpak-protocol-for-excess-heat
- Liaw, Bor Yann; Tao, Peng-Long; Turner, Patrick; and Liebert, Bruce E. (1991) 'Elevated-temperature excess heat production in a Pd + D system,' J. Electroanal. Chem., 319, p. 161-175 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/002207289187075F
- Miles, Melvin H (2003) 'Correlation of Excess Enthalpy and Helium-4 Production: A review' in Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion, 2003. Cambridge, MA: LENR-CANR.org.  https://www.academia.edu/80462066/Correlation_of_excess_enthalpy_and_helium_4_production_A_review
- Qiao, Dongwei; Xie, Kaiyu; and Kamali, Ali Reza (2020) 'Green production of hydrogen-doped faceted cobalt microcrystals using water-assisted molten salt electro-reduction method', Materials Advances 2020, 1, p. 2225-2235 https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2020/ma/d0ma00399a 
- Staker, M. R. (2019) 'Coupled Calorimetry and Resistivity Measurements, in Conjunction with an Emended and More Complete Phase Diagram of the Palladium–Isotopic Hydrogen System' J. Condensed Matter Nucl. Sci. 29 pp 129–168. https://www.lenr-canr.org/acrobat/StakerMRpreprintco.pdf
- Szpak, Stanislaw, and Mosier-Boss, Pamela A. (1991) 'On the behavior of Pd deposited in the presence of evolving deuterium' J. Electroanal. Chem. 302, pp 255-260 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/002207289185044P
- Williams, Ammon N.; Cao, Guoping; and Shaltry, Michael R. (2021) 'Voltammetry measurements in lithium chloride-lithium oxide (LiCl–Li2O) salt: An evaluation of working electrode materials' Journal of Nuclear Materials 546, 152760, pp. 1-10 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0022311520313684
- Xie, Kaiyu and Kamali, Ali Reza (2010) 'Molten salt electrochemical production and in situ utilization of hydrogen for iron production, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 44 (2019), 24353-24359. 

- 📫 How to reach me ... hthalljr@halllabs.com

<!---
hthalljr/hthalljr is a ✨ special ✨ repository because its `README.md` (this file) appears on your GitHub profile.
You can click the Preview link to take a look at your changes.
--->
